In this video I'll explain snapshots and how we can successful use them and we'll also talk about some
of the disadvantages of snapshots and potential issues that they can cause.
But first and foremost what is a snapshot Well here we see a virtual machine.
And at this moment this virtual machine has certain programs running it has contents of memory.
It's also got a virtual disk and a snapshot is used to take a point in time picture of a virtual machine.
So let's say for example on this virtual machine we need to perform some sort of update and we want
to give ourselves a fallback point just in case something goes wrong with this update.
And this virtual machine is powered on.
So there's information currently in memory and also there's the contents of data that are stored on
my virtual disk.
Now when we take a snapshot a new file is created called the VM Mesan file.
And in this file the current contents of memory are stored.
So now we have half of our point and time picture of this virtual machine.
The other thing that we need to capture is the current contents of the virtual disk the other thing
that happens when we take a snapshot is that this virtual disk or VM decay is going to be marked as
read only this ensures that no changes will be made to the data on this virtual disk and it will be
preserved exactly as it was when we took our Snapshot.
So when the original virtual disk is locked a new Delta disk is created.
And remember this is a running VM.
So now that the original disk is Read-Only we need somewhere to write changes to.
So that Delta disk is going to be where all of our live data rights go moving forward.
So those are the components that get introduced when you take a snapshot.
And now we have our backout point right now we have a point and time picture of exactly what was going
on in this virtual machine at a given moment in time.
And let's say that our software update doesn't go so well you know.
Now maybe we need to revert back to this snapshot we need to fall back to that fallback point that we
created.
If we decide to revert to a snapshot the contents of that VMA file are restored to memory now the contents
of memory are exactly as they were when we took that snapshot.
The Delta that VM decay is discarded because we don't need those changes that have been made since the
snapshot we want to revert to our virtual disk the way that it was when that snapshot was taken.
So the original VM decay is simply unlocked and is no longer read only.
And now our virtual disk is exactly back to the way it was and our contents of memory are exactly as
they were when we took that snapshot
However snapshots are not without their limitations.
So for example let's go back to this V.M. And again the virtual machine is running and it has a single
virtual disk.
And when we take our Snapshot the contents of memory are captured in that vehemence and file the VMT
is marked as read only and the new Delta that VMT is created and moving forward.
That's where all live right of data occur.
Well what do you think will happen if we leave that snapshot in place for weeks and months.
That Delta disk will get bigger and bigger and bigger and eventually we may decide that we don't actually
need this snapshot anymore.
Let's say it's been three months and we finally decided to delete this snapshot.
This means that the last three months of changes are all located on that Delta disk and we can't just
throw all that data away.
When we delete the snapshot all of that data needs to get copied back to the original VM DK.
So as we delete the snapshot the VM Ehsaan file is no longer needed.
There's no point in hanging on to the contents of memory at the time of the snapshot so the VM isn't
files simply perched.
Then the original VM DK will be unlocked and all of the changes that have occurred since that snapshot
was taken will now need to get committed to that original VM.
DK This can be time consuming and it can also cause the size of this virtual disk to temporarily expand
while that copy operation is in progress.
It may actually consume more space on the data store than it normally does.
One other side note.
At times deleting a snapshot can take a very long time.
If you've left the snapshot out there for an extended period it may take a long time for that snapshot
to delete.
Just be aware that once you start deleting a snapshot you cannot cancel that process.
Also be aware that you cannot shut down a reboot that virtual machine while the snapshot deletion is
occurring.
So what do we take away from all of this.
Well a snapshot is a point in time picture of a virtual machine.
It captures the exact state of the VM at that moment but it is not a backup.
It should not be retained long term when a snapshot is taken that original VM is now marked as read
only to preserve the contents of the virtual disk exactly as they are and all live changes will now
go to a Delta that VMT K when the snapshot is deleted.
All of those changes that are in the doubt that VMT K must now be committed back to the original VM
DK snapshots are useful for short term needs such as creating a fallback point before making a change.
I personally have a policy that I will never leave a snapshot in my environment for more than one week
because at that point the Delta file can become very large and it can become more and more difficult
to delete that snapshot.